#1: The Definition of “Create”

When I say that I “created“ a sandcastle, does anyone believe that I created the sandcastle from nothing? 

Is there any sense, outside of religion, where we use the word “create” to convey the idea of creation ex nihilo? No, of course not. All creation is creation ex materia, that is, creation from organizing pre-existing materials. If I create a sand castle, then it’s assumed that there was pre-existing sand. If I create a painting, then you’ll assume that I went and got a pre-existing canvas and some pre-existing paint from somewhere. 

That’s why when we say the word “create” we need to completely get rid of the assumption that it means “creation from nothing.” Every single time Andrew tries to make that assumption, I’m going to challenge him on it. The default meaning of “create” is to create from existing matter, and this isn’t just true of English, but Hebrew as well. So the burden of proof in every case is on Andrew to prove that the writer is referring to ex nihilo creation specifically. I have no doubt that Andrew is going to fight against that idea, because as soon as we let go of the idea that “create” automatically means to “create from nothing” the entire case for creation ex nihilo falls apart. There’s nothing in the Bible to indicate that “creation” means “creation from nothing” unless you read it with that assumption already in your mind, and there’s significant evidence to indicate the Bible teaches creation from pre-existing matter. 

The word for “create” in Hebrew is “bara,” and you’ll see it used in almost all the passages in the Old Testament that discuss creation. Joseph Smith famously pointed out that this word does not mean to create out of nothing but to organize, the way that you would organize materials to build a ship, for example. We can use Strong's concordance to find other verses that use this word, and we see that Joseph was right:

Jos 17:15 - And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thee up to the wood country, and cut down H1254 for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of the giants
Jos 17:18 - But the mountain shall be thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: H1254 and the outgoings of it shall be thine:
Psa 51:10 - Create H1254 in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me
Isa 65:18 - But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: H1254 for, behold, I create H1254Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people joy

#2: The Scriptures

With that out of the way, let’s consider 2 Peter 3:5

“For when they maintain this, it escapes their notice that by the word of God the heavens existed long ago and the earth was formed out of water and by water”

“Water” here refers to the unorganized matter that LDS assert that everything was made from, mentioned in Genesis 1:2. As opposed to ex nihilo, where there are no scripture passages that explicitly say the world was created out of nothing, this verse is explicitly creation ex materia. 

In addition, we also have John 1:3:

“All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.”

Now, don’t you think that’s an interesting qualifier right there at the end? Why would John have to specify that Jesus made all things that were made, unless there were things in the universe that hadn’t been made? Under ex nihilo creationism, nothing is uncreated except for God himself and therefore that last half of the verse makes no sense. It only makes sense if you believe, as John apparently did, that not everything in the universe was created.

#3: Patristics

Now, I’m not a huge patristics guy but I know that Andrew and many others place a lot of importance on patristics, so I wanted to at least mention the patristic support. Full disclosure, this is not my original research and comes from Blake Ostler’s article “The Doctrine Of Creation Ex Nihilo Was Created Out Of Nothing.”

Justin Martyr’s “First Apology” written in 165 AD says:

“And we have been taught that He in the beginning did of His goodness, for man’s sake, create all things out of unformed matter” (Chapter 10)


Later in the same book, Justin Martyr accuses Plato of borrowing creation ex materia from the writings of Moses:

“And that you may learn that it was from our teachers – we mean the account given through the prophets – that Plato borrowed his statement that God, having altered matter which was shapeless, made the world. Hear the very words spoken through Moses, who, as shown above, was the first prophet, and of greater antiquity than the Greek writers; and through whom the spirit of prophecy, signifying how and from what materials God at first formed the world, spake thus: ‘In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was invisible and unfurnished, and darkness was upon the face of the deep; and the spirit of God moved over the waters. And so God said, Let there be light; and it was so.’ So that both Plato and they who agree with him, and we ourselves, have learned, and you also can be convinced, that by the word of God the whole world was made out of the substance spoken of before by Moses.” (Chapter 59)

In addition, Athenagoras of Athens, writing about 170 A.D., also taught that God created by energizing pre-existing matter. He stated that the Logos “came forth to be the idea and energizing power of all material things, which lay without attributes, as inactive earth, the grosser particles being mixed up in the purer.”

Finally, Clement of Alexandria, in about 220 A.D. wrote a poem affirming creation ex materia:

O King…
Maker of all, who heaven and heaven’s adornment
By the Divine Word alone didst make;
… according to a well-ordered plan;
Out of a confused heap who didst create
This ordered sphere, and from the shapeless mass
Of matter didst the universe adorn


#4: The Problem of Evil

Now, I have one last point and I hope to devote most of my time to it, since it gets to the heart of why this debate is so crucial. I can imagine that it would be easy for some people to look at this debate and see this unimportant. Like debating whether or not Adam had a belly button. But this one point, I believe, changes all of that.

Implied in the doctrine of creation ex nihilo is the idea that God was once absolutely, utterly alone in the universe. This isn’t explicitly stated, but I think most people would agree that’s the logical consequence of ex nihilo creationism. On top of that, we all agree that God has perfect foreknowledge of the consequences of any action He takes, and He’s all powerful, which means He’s never forced to take a particular action if He doesn’t want to.

So, because God was once alone in the universe with perfect foreknowledge of all the consequences of all His decisions, and the ability to make other decisions if he wanted to, then it’s fair to say that God is responsible for everything in the universe, both good and evil. No one else can take any of the credit or bear any of the blame. Even the free will defense doesn’t change anything, because if God knew what bad choices you’d make and still created you ex nihilo anyway, then it doesn’t really matter why you made the bad choices. 

If you affirm that God has absolute power, absolute knowledge, and absolute creation (i.e. ex nihilo creation) then there’s no logical alternative. God is directly responsible for everything wrong in the universe, including us. To make things worse, if people are really being sent to hell to suffer for their sins, then God is responsible for that too, both for creating hell and for creating the sins that made it necessary. 

But if that’s true then how could God be perfectly loving, as we all believe Him to be?

This is why I believe that this issue is so important. If you affirm creation ex nihilo then the problem of evil becomes insurmountable. There’s more than one person who’s lost their faith because they couldn’t imagine how a loving God could possibly exist in a world like ours. 

However, creation ex materia solves this problem. Latter-day Saints don’t just believe that the universe was made up of an organized matter, there were also things called “Intelligences”. We don’t have a lot of details, but we know that these Intelligences are co-eternal with God and they form the core of who we are and the decisions we make. God organized these Intelligences to form Spirits, and those Spirits now dwell inside our physical bodies. 

With this one, simple addition, the problem of evil can actually be solved. The free will defense actually works now, because our decisions truly are our own. God’s creations are imperfect because God was working with imperfect materials. Some pain and suffering is legitimately our fault, and the pain and suffering caused by God is to help us to learn and grow. 



Cross-Examination Questions:
(I probably won’t use all of these due to time constraints , so I’ll just ask the ones that seem relevant depending on the direction the debate is going.)

Line of questioning #1:

Q: What is your solution to the problem of evil?

(Depending on your answer, I’ll continue to ask clarifying questions to highlight the contradiction between your solution to the problem of evil and ex nihilo creationism.)


Line of questioning #2:

Q: Do you believe that God has free will? (I assume that your answer would be “yes.”)

Q: And so, would you agree that it’s possible to be morally perfect and yet nevertheless to have free will? (Again, I assume that your answer would be “yes.”)

Q: Under the doctrine of creation ex nihilo, is there anything that would’ve prevented our all powerful God from creating morally perfect people while still preserving their free will? 

Q: If nothing prevented Him, then why didn’t He?


Line of questioning #3: 

For reference, all these verses use the same word, both in English and Hebrew:
Jhn 1:3 - All things G3956 were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.
Col 1:16 - For by him were all things G3956 created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things G3956 were created by him, and for him
Rev 4:11 - Thou art worthy, O Lord,to receive glory and honor and power: for thou hast created all things, G3956 and for thy pleasure they are and were created

Q: When it says all Jerusalem was troubled, how literally should we interpret that? Was every man, woman and child in Jerusalem troubled at the news that the Wise Men brought? If not, then what is it actually saying here?
Mat 2:3 - When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled, and all G3956 Jerusalem with him

Q: Do you hate the Apostles?
Mat 10:22 - And ye shall be hated of all G3956 men for my name's sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved

Q: “The former treatise” refers to the Gospel of Luke. Does the Gospel of Luke contain absolutely “all that Jesus began to do and teach”? 
Act 1:1 - The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all G3956 that Jesus began both to do and teach


Line of questioning #4:

Q: Who came first, Justin Martyr or Tertulian?

Q: Can you agree that, in the quotes I read, Justin Martyr is unambiguously teaching creation ex materia?

Q: Can you name any Early Christian Father from earlier than Justin Martyr who unambiguously taught creation ex nihilo?

Q: How do you think Joseph Smith knew to restore this ancient Christian doctrine, given that it was virtually unheard of by the 1830’s?

Q: If Christianity originally taught creation ex materia and then later switched to ex nihilo, then wouldn’t that be evidence that an Apostasy had happened?


Line of questioning #5:


Q: What do you believe it means when the scriptures say “with God all things are possible”?

Q: Do you believe that God’s power is limited by logic? For example, do you believe God can create a married bachelor?

Q: Does it make God any less great or glorious if His power doesn’t violate logic?

Q: If God’s power is limited by something like logic, why can’t we assume that other limits don’t also exist simply because of how the universe works?


Line of questioning #6:

Q: I could be wrong, but it seems to me like you’re arguing God created unorganized matter and then created everything else out of that unorganized matter. Doesn’t that theory seem needlessly complicated to you?

Q: Let’s say, hypothetically, that you’re right and God also created the unorganized matter. How do you know that the unorganized matter was created ex nihilo and not just from even more unorganized matter?
