When Nicaea came around and the bishops sought to close the case of Arianism, homoousios was the one word that did. It effectually solidified the past four years’ worth of teachings of God’s essence or substance by taking the pre-niceae church’s concept of God’s unique substance and putting a word to it, thus refuting the arian heresy. 
Homoousios means “one substance,” or “same substance.” This means that Jesus is the same substance as the Father and not a creature created by God the Father that the Arians were teaching. The reason substance was a huge deal was because the understanding was that there were two substances. One of creation: angels, souls, the earth, and the heaven, and one of God. We can view this too, as different essences, and or state of being. 
They did not see God to be of the same substance that all of creation comprises because God alone has immortality, per I Tim 6:16, and all else had a beginning. He alone created all things (this is true for the Son, God’s Word as much as it is for the Father), see Ephesians 3:9, Colossians 1:16, John 1:3, and Revelation 4:11. By asserting that Jesus is One Substance with the Father, it preserved His true divinity, which is what was under attack. The Word of God, Jesus Christ, is not a created being who had a beginning but is eternal. He is the First and the Last, and the God who we call upon to save us, which no other god can do. 
The Triune God is the creator of all things, which means He created matter and was not just the sculptor, like my opponent believes. He is independent of His creation because He alone is immortal. Nothing or no one created God or Jesus or the Holy Spirit. They never came into being. God said His name was I AM, or I Am that I Am, as this meant that God is “the uncreated, self-existent One.” 
Revelation 4:11 - “Worthy are you, our Lord and God, to receive glory and honor and power, for you created all things, and by your will they existed and were created.” The fact all things came into existence is a powerful claim. It’s one thing to say all things were created and another to say that they also came into existence. The very fact all things came into existence by the will of God means that the creator and creature’s distinction is warranted. If one created all things and caused them to exist, it would logically denote that the creator is external to its creation. 
Athenagoras, a Christian apologist writing in A.D. 168, tells us: “We employ language that distinguishes between God and matter and the natures of both. (A Plea for the Christians 24). This is incredibly important. Though pre-niceae fathers did not use the word homoousios, they employed the concept that Athenagoras was speaking of. He adds: “Because the multitude, who cannot distinguish between matter and God … pray to idols made of matter, should we who do distinguish and separate the uncreated and the created … come and worship images?” Us christian’s worship the creator of matter and not idols made with it, nor do we worship a god who is the organizer of matter or the god who is matter that the LDS believe. 
For my opponent to have a clarification of certain definitions, substance, nature, and essence is defined by the fact one is uncreated and the other is created. 
Now, in short, scholars charge that the trinity developed over hundreds of year. However, it did not. Because of this formate, I cannot list off all the church fathers and their teachings but I can list off a couple, particularly those closest to the time of the apostles.
The early church likens Christ’s oneness with the Father as the sun is with its lights and fires kindled by other fires. For example, Justin Martyr said, “I have discussed briefly in what has gone before; when I asserted that this power was begotten from the Father, by His power and will, but not by abscission, [i.e. Cutting off] as if the substance of the Father were divided; as all other things partitioned and divided are not the same after as before they were divided: and, for the sake of example, I took the case of fires kindled from a fire, which we see to be distinct from it, and yet that from which many can be kindled is by no means made less, but remains the same.”
Athenagoras would then add about the substance of God: “We acknowledge a God, and a Son his Logos, and a Holy Spirit, united in substance.” 
Now comes the equally important part. Christ is the Father’s LOGOS. That is to mean literally His logic and reason. John 1:1 outright says it. The Word/logos was with God and the Word was God. This is why Justin Martyr said, “but not by abscission, [i.e. Cutting off] as if the substance of the Father were divided.” That is why the Nicene creed says “God from God, Light from Light, true God from true God, begotten not made, one in being with the Father. Through him all things were made.” This is why Jesus said, “I and the Father are one.” And “if you have seen me, you have seen the Father.”
Athenagoras, “We are not atheists … because we acknowledge one God, uncreated, eternal … by whom the universe has been created through his Logos…. We acknowledge a Son of God. Nor let anyone think it ridiculous that God should have a Son…. The Son of God is the Logos of the Father…. The Nous [mind] and Logos of the Father is the Son of God. (ibid. 10) He said this 300 years prior to Nicaea, and Justin said his even earlier. This doesn’t even scratch the surface.
A great example of this concept to highlight is Tertullian’s explanation in Against Praxeas, “Observe, then, that when you are silently conversing with yourself, this very process is carried on within you by your reason, which meets you with a word at every movement of your thought … Whatever you think, there is a word … You must speak it in your mind … Thus, in a certain sense, the word is a second person within you, through which in thinking you utter speech … The word is itself a different thing from yourself. Now how much more fully is all this transacted in God, whose image and likeness you are?”
The Word was with God, and that is to mean in His mind, as his reason and logic, and the Word was God, that is to say, He is of the same substance. Logically, if the Father begot the Logos, who is His literal Word and logic, then that would make him God, I.E. the same substance. 
The LDS agrees with the statement that Christ is God’s logic, Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught: “Christ is the Word or Messenger of Salvation. Thus, John’s meaning is: ‘In pre-existence was Christ, and Christ was with the Father, and he, the Son, had himself also attained godhood.’ I. V. John 1:1–2; D&C 93:7–8. The Gospel of John calls Jesus the Word (see John 1:1; logos in Greek), a complex philosophical term that basically means the divine principle of reason that brings order to the universe and links the human mind with deity.”
Let’s skip the fact that Elder Bruce said that Jesus had attained godhood, and acknowledge the fact they see the logos as God’s reason. To this, I quote John of Damascus, “As long as you say that Christ is the Word of God and Spirit, why do you accuse us of being Associators? For the word, and the spirit, is inseparable from that in which it naturally has existence. Therefore, if the Word of God is in God, then it is obvious that He is God. If, however, He is outside of God, then, according to you, God is without word and without spirit. Consequently, by avoiding the introduction of an associate with God, you have mutilated Him. It would be far better for you to say that He has an associate than to mutilate Him, as if you were dealing with a stone or a piece of wood or some other inanimate object. Thus, you speak untruly when you call us Hetaeriasts; we retort by calling you Mutilators of God.”
Despite St. John of Damascus arguing against Muslims who see Jesus as a mere man, wholly separate and whose existence is independent from God the Father; we can apply the same standard toward the LDS, whose Jesus’ existence or his godhood, is independent even though they agree with the above saying “the word was with God and the Word was God.” and “The Father is in me and I in the Father.” If Jesus is not the second person of the Trinity and vigorously the one substance with God, then we have mutilated God by stripping the Father of His Word. 
Not only is Jesus homoousios with the Father, but Jesus is homoousios with us. This is what I want to end my opener with. It is only through the Orthodox christian framework that melds together the gospel. That God took on flesh and saved us from our sins, from death, and the devil. But it wasn’t because of some created a creature that Arianism taught or some separate god, whose stature isn’t that of the highest, such as my opponent has said and believes, that has saved us. It is that of God, the Word, the Logos, that took on flesh. By taking on our flesh, He has joined both man and God to be in communion again. Through faith, God adopts us through Christ as Children of God. Christ joins us with the divine essence because by putting on Christ; we are have become homoousios with God Himself. This is possible because of Christ’s one substance with the Father, the uncreated God. Since He is of the same substance, and since He took on flesh, which is the same substance of us, we are now joined with God Himself! 
John 14:20–“At that day you will know that I am in My Father, and you in Me, and I in you.”
