Lisbon Portugal 1755
On November 1, 1755 a large earthquake struck Lisbon, Portugal. It was estimated to be around 8.7 in magnitude and was felt in Spain, Portugal and Northern Africa (“The New Madrid Seismic Zone.” Boer and Sanders, 2007). 
This earthquake occurred on the Azores-Gibraltar Transform Fault, a fault zone that lies in the eastern Atlantic Ocean (“1755 Lisbon Earthquake”). 
November 1 is All Saints Day and many of Lisbon’s residents were in church during the earthquake; the stone church buildings collapsed on top of them and killed many. This quake also caused a large tsunami that flooded Lisbon and caused more deaths. In even more devastation, a fire broke out and burned the city, destroying the royal palace as well as other items and places of cultural significance (History.com editors). Estimates of the death toll vary, but this disaster killed somewhere between 10,000 and 70,000 people (“The New Madrid Seismic Zone.”).

A map showing tsunami travel times from the Lisbon earthquake. The time given is how long it would take the tsunami to travel to that location.

Red: 1-4 hours
Yellow: 5-6 hours
Green: 7-14 hours
Blue: 15-21 hours

Lisbon was one of the largest ports on the Atlantic coast and consequently was a very important and prosperous city prior to this earthquake. After the disaster, it never quite returned to its previous prominence (Boer and Sanders, 2007).
One Portuguese government official, Marquis de Pombal, was tasked with rebuilding the city. He was met resistance, however, from Jesuit priests in the city who believed the earthquake was God’s punishment, and that the survivors needed to make peace with God, not rebuild the city (Boer and Sanders, 2007).  
Voltaire, a famous 17th century philosopher, wrote about this tension in his novel Candide. 
Marquis de Pombal prevailed, however, bringing many modern changes to the city, and even implementing some primitive forms of earthquake mitigation. Pombal rebuilt the city with wider, broader and streets and surveyed people to gather data about their experience with the earthquake (a precursor to more formal scientific studies) (History.com editors; “1755 Lisbon Earthquake”). 


Slide 6 of 30: New Madrid, Missouri, USA 1811-1812 
From December to February of 1811-1812, a series of magnitude 7 or greater earthquakes struck New Madrid, Missouri, USA. These earthquakes make history as the largest earthquakes to happen in the eastern part of the US (most earthquakes in the United States happen in the western half of the country). 
These earthquakes all happened in the New Madrid Seismic Zone, a seismically active area that is unique because it is NOT near a major plate boundary. 
Several settlements near the Mississippi River were destroyed because of these earthquakes, and the shaking could be felt as far away as Connecticut and Louisiana (“The New Madrid Seismic Zone”). 

Missouri was not very well-populated at the time and the number of casualties is unknown (Wikipedia). There were, however, many strange natural phenomena of this earthquake. Liquefaction in the area caused many sand blows, which are small mounds wherein sand, water and mud rise to the surface (they are also called sand blows or sand volcanoes). (“The New Madrid Seismic Zone”). 
Reports from the time state that one earthquake actually caused the Mississippi River to flow backwards. This was caused by a cliff that formed after an earthquake, causing the water in the river to back up, or flow backwards (“The New Madrid Seismic Zone”). 
John James Audubon, a famous American artist and naturalist, experienced one of these earthquakes himself and described it like this:
“I heard what I imagined to be the distant rumbling of a violent tornado…all the shrubs and trees began to move from their very roots, the ground rose and fell in successive furrows, like the ruffled water of a lake…” (Boer and Sanders, 2007)

The New Madrid area (shown in the black rectangle) is still at risk for an earthquake today. The USGS estimates that there is a 25-40% chance of magnitude 6 or higher in the next 50 years and a 7-10% chance of an earthquake the size of the 1811-1812 earthquake in the next 50 years (“The New Madrid Seismic Zone”). 

Slide 9 of 30: San Francisco, California, USA 1906
The 1906 San Francisco earthquake was one of the largest disasters, and the deadliest earthquake, to occur in the United States. 
This earthquake occurred on April 18, 1906 on the San Andreas Fault. The San Andreas Fault is a strike-slip transform fault on the boundary of the Pacific and North American plates. 
The magnitude of this earthquake is estimated to be 7.7-7.9 (“The Great 1906…”). Ground shaking and liquefaction caused a lot of damage, but most of the destruction from this earthquake was caused by fire that raged through the city for three days. 

The San Francisco earthquake destroyed 28,000 buildings and cost about $400 million (1906 dollars). Around 3000 people perished in this disaster and 225,000 people became homeless (which was over 50% of the total population at the time).
Aside from the damage, this event was important because it greatly advanced our scientific understanding of earthquakes. Andrew C. Lawson, led a state commission to investigate the earthquake, resulting in a famous scientific document called the Lawson Report. During this investigation, scientists made new observations about the relationship between soft soils and ground shaking, and the relationship between building design and earthquake damage. 
Perhaps the most important discovery from the Lawson report, though, was that of the elastic rebound theory. This theory describes how Earth’s crust gradually deforms under stress prior to an earthquake and then “snaps back” to is original shape after energy is released during the earthquake. 

In 1904, 2 years prior to the earthquake, a man named Amadeo Giannini opened the Bank of Italy in San Francisco. His bank was one of the only ones to survive the earthquake and Amadeo started making loans to businesses and survivors “on a face and a signature.” The Bank of Italy eventually became the Bank of America and Amadeo Giannini is credited with being the father of modern banking.  (“A.P. Giannini”, 2012)
The San Andreas fault is very active and other large earthquakes have happened in the San Francisco Bay Area since then (the most recent one was in 1989). In 2003, scientists estimated that there was 62% chance of magnitude 6.7 or higher earthquake happening by 2032 (“Earthquake Hazards…”). 

Slide 14 of 30: Tangshan, China 1976
In July of 1976, a magnitude 7.8 earthquake struck the city of Tangshan, China. Tangshan is a densely populated, industrial city and at least 240,000 people died–making this one of the deadliest earthquake disasters in modern times. 
This earthquake occurred on the Tangshan fault, a strike-slip fault that was unknown prior to this event (Rafferty, 2021). Tangshan is not directly near any plate boundaries; the closest boundary the subduction zone near Japan, over 1600 km (1000 miles) away. 
Most of the Tangshan area has deep, sandy soil, which made liquefaction a big hazard. It’s estimated that 85% of the unreinforced buildings in the city collapsed due to liquefaction (Huixian et al., 2002). Liquefaction also significantly damaged agriculture in this area (Huixian et al., 2002). 

News of the Tangshan earthquake was slow–the official death toll wasn’t released until 3 years after the event (“China Marks…”, 2006). 
Some sources say that this event was predicted before it happened. Chengmin Wang, a Chinese seismologist, warned that there could be a large earthquake in the Tangshan area soon (Mearns, 2021). It is uncertain whether a warning was issued for this earthquake or this prediction was ignored (“China Marks…”, 2006). 
This earthquake coincided with a tumultuous time in the Chinese government–Chinese president Zhou Enlai died several months before this event, and Communist leader Mao Tse-tung died two months after. Some viewed the earthquake as an omen of Mao Tse-tung’s death. (“China Marks…”, 2006) 
Since this earthquake, Tangshan has been rebuilt; all new buildings are earthquake-resistant (Rafferty, 2021). 

Slide 17 of 30: Haiti and Chile Earthquakes, 2010
In 2010, there were large earthquakes that occurred in both Haiti and Chile. Despite happening only about a month apart, the devastation caused by these earthquakes was drastically different. 
The earthquake in Haiti had a smaller magnitude, but caused thousands of deaths.
The earthquake in Chile had a larger magnitude, but fewer deaths.
The comparison of these two quakes illustrates the effectiveness of earthquake mitigation. 

Haitian Earthquake
Occurred on Jan. 12, 2010
Magnitude 7
Around 250,000 people died (Reid, 2020)

Chilean Earthquake
Occurred on Feb. 27, 2010
Magnitude 8.8
Around 500 people died (Rafferty, 2021)

The Haitian earthquake occurred on a strike-slip transform fault called the Enriquillo-Plantain Garden Fault. This fault is near the boundary of the Caribbean Plate and the North American Plate. There have been many instances of seismic activity in the Caribbean, but the country of Haiti itself had not had a major earthquake in awhile–other large earthquakes occurred in 1751, 1770, and 1860 (USGS Poster).
Over 300,000 people died in this earthquake. More than 1.3 million people were left homeless and many lived in tent encampments following the disaster. 
According to one source, this was the most destructive event in modern times when comparing the number of casualties to population (3% of Haiti’s population was killed and 13% were left homeless). (DesRoches et al., 2011)
The Enriquillo-Plantain Garden Fault. The epicenter of the 2010 earthquake is also shown. Map by Karl Musser. 

The Chile earthquake occurred on Feb. 27, 2010 and was a magnitude 8.8
The Nazca Plate is sliding underneath the South American Plate, creating a subduction zone off the coast of Chile. Consequently, Chile experiences many earthquakes each year. 
The 2010 earthquake occurred on a thrust fault offshore. Since it occurred in the ocean, this earthquake also caused a tsunami, with waves reaching 95 ft (29m) high on the Chilean coast (Tsunami Historical Series). A tsunami warning was sent to 54 countries (including the United States) (EERI, 2010).
An intensity map of the 2010 Chilean earthquake. Despite having an 8.8 magnitude, there are no areas of extreme shaking. 

The Chilean earthquake was a magnitude 8.8 and was 63 times bigger than the Haitian earthquake (which was magnitude 7.0) and released 501 times more energy (USGS Calculator). Yet the Chilean earthquake killed 525 people, while the smaller Haitian earthquake killed over 300,000 people. 
The Haitian earthquake is the unfortunate perfect example of a “true” disaster. 
Why? 
These are some of the contributing factors: 
Almost every area and industry of the country was affected, thus making it very difficult to know who could help and who could/should take charge in the aftermath.
Haiti is the most impoverished country in the Western hemisphere and resources are limited.
There was very little seismic preparedness. Haiti lacked seismic building codes.
(DesRoches et al., 2011)
The comparison of these two earthquakes illustrates the effectiveness of seismic preparedness. 

Japan 2011
On March 11, 2011 a magnitude 9.0 earthquake struck Japan. It was one of the largest earthquakes in history and also triggered one of the deadliest tsunamis in the world. 
This earthquake happened on a thrust fault in the Japan Trench. Since Japan is part of a subduction zone, earthquakes happen there frequently. This particular earthquake was the largest one ever recorded in Japan. It was so powerful that the entire island of Honshu (the largest island in Japan) moved 2.4 meters (8 feet) to the east. (Carlowicz, 2021)

Less than an hour after this earthquake, a tsunami arrived on the shores of Japan. The maximum wave height was 40 meters (130 feet) and 2000 km (1242 miles) of Japan’s coast was affected (“On This Day…”, 2021)
This tsunami caused massive destruction in Japan. It is estimated that 98% of the damage was caused by the tsunami, not the ground shaking of the earthquake. Damage from the tsunami was also reported in Hawaii, California, Peru, Chile, the Galapagos Islands, and French Polynesia. (“On This Day…”, 2021) Watch a video of the tsunami: Japan Tsunami 2011. 
One of the most devastating effects of the tsunami was the damage to the Fukushima nuclear power plant. Nuclear reactors melted and exploded, prompting an evacuation of 47,000 nearby residents and the creation of a 20km (12.4 mile) exclusion zone (Britannica, 2021). Cleaning up and maintaining a nuclear disaster is a decades-long process; this area is still being monitored today. 

Over 18,000 people died in this disaster. It ultimately cost a total of $340 billion, making it the most expensive natural disaster to date (“On This Day…”, 2021.)




