Mt. Pinatubo
Mt. Pinatubo erupted on June 12, 1991. The eruption shown wasn’t even “the big one.” (USGS)
Learning Objectives
Your goals in studying this chapter are to:
• Discuss volcanoes and eruptions and the related
terminology.
• Describe the types of volcanoes and related features.
• Identify the types of volcanic rocks.
• Discuss the kinds of damage a volcano can cause.
• Describe volcanic hazards mitigation measures and their
limitations.
• Describe volcano risk in the United States.
• Describe volcanic eruption prediction.
• Describe what happened to Herculaneum and Pompeii
and what was learned from their excavations.
Eruption on the island of Hawaii, 1984 (USGS)
** Follow all links.
They are part of your text. **
Introduction
Volcanoes destroy and volcanoes create. Over a time span
longer than human memory and record, volcanoes have
played a key role in forming and modifying the planet
upon which we live.
The text for this chapter was written by Robert I. Tilling
in a work called, “Volcanoes” for the USGS. It was then
modified and supplemented by faculty of BYU-Idaho.
Gaseous emissions from volcanic vents over hundreds of
millions of years formed the Earth's earliest oceans and
atmosphere, which supplied the ingredients vital to evolve
and sustain life. Over geologic eons, countless volcanic
eruptions have produced mountains, plateaus, and plains,
which subsequent erosion and weathering have sculpted
into majestic landscapes and formed fertile soils.
Ironically, these volcanic soils and inviting terranes have
attracted, and continue to attract, people to live on the
flanks of volcanoes. As population density increases in
regions of active or potentially active volcanoes, mankind
must become increasingly aware of the hazards and learn
not to "crowd" the volcanoes.
People living in the shadow of volcanoes must live in
harmony with them and expect, and should plan for,
periodic violent unleashings of their pent-up energy.
Mt. Etna Destruction
Another famous Sicilian volcano is Mt. Etna. This image
shows a concrete house buried by a lava flow from Mt.
Etna in 2003 (BYUI).
Introduction (continued)
The word volcano comes from the little island of Vulcano in the Mediterranean Sea north of Sicily.
Centuries ago, the people living in this area believed that Vulcano was the chimney of the forge of
Vulcan--the blacksmith of the Roman gods.
See Mt. Etna in Google Earth
Be sure to zoom in and fly around the mountain. Find the
nearest cities, and evaluate their risk from lava flows.
They thought that the hot lava fragments and clouds of dust erupting from Vulcano came from Vulcan's forge as he beat out
thunderbolts for Jupiter, king of the gods, and weapons for Mars, the god of war. In Polynesia the people attributed eruptive
activity to the beautiful but wrathful Pele, Goddess of Volcanoes, whenever she was angry or spiteful. Today we know that
volcanic eruptions are not supernatural, but can be studied and interpreted by scientists.
Volcanic Hazards
Volcanic hazards consist of more than the obvious
ones associated with an eruption (lava flows,
pyroclastic flows, bombs, and ash fallout). Volcanoes
are inherently unstable because of the non-uniform
way volcanic materials are deposited on them to
construct the volcano.
In addition, some materials like ash fall and cinders
are soft, and move downhill easily. If that were not
enough:
Volcanoes can have molten or very hot rocks
inside of them that bake and corrode the
volcano from the inside out.
Groundwater heated by the magma or hot rock
(hydrothermal water) can alter volcanic rock into soft
materials, making it weak and unstable.
That makes any steep volcano hazardous whether or
not it is actively erupting. Add deep snow or a wet
climate, and the hazards increase dramatically.
Volcanic Ash Impacts
The features and hazards summarized in this diagram
are explained in the following pages (USGS).
Volcanic Hazards
Eruption Columns and Clouds
An explosive eruption blasts solid and molten rock fragments (tephra) and volcanic gases into the air with
tremendous force. The largest rock fragments (bombs) usually fall back to the ground within 2 miles of the vent.
Small fragments (less than about 0.1 inch across) of volcanic glass, minerals, and rock (ash) rise high into the air,
forming a huge, billowing eruption column.
Eruption columns can grow rapidly and reach more than 12 miles above a volcano in less than 30 minutes, forming
an eruption cloud. The volcanic ash in the cloud can pose a serious hazard to aviation. During the past 15 years,
about 80 commercial jets have been damaged by inadvertently flying into ash clouds, and several have nearly crashed
because of engine failure. Large eruption clouds can extend hundreds of miles downwind, resulting in ash fall over
enormous areas; the wind carries the smallest ash particles the farthest.
Ash from the May 18, 1980, eruption of Mount St. Helens, Washington, fell over an area of 22,000 square miles in the
Western United States. Heavy ash fall can collapse buildings, and even minor ash fall can dam- age crops, electronics,
and machinery.
Volcanic Gases
Volcanoes emit gases during eruptions. Even when a volcano is not erupting, cracks in the ground allow gases to
reach the surface through small openings called fumaroles.
More than 90% of all gas emitted by volcanoes is water vapor (steam), most of which is heated
ground water (underground water from rain- fall and streams).
Other common volcanic gases are carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen, and fluorine.
• Sulfur dioxide gas can react with water droplets in the atmosphere to create acid rain, which causes corrosion and
harms vegetation.
• Carbon dioxide is heavier than air and can be trapped in low areas in concentrations that are deadly to people and
animals.
• Fluorine, which in high concentrations is toxic, can be adsorbed onto volcanic ash particles that later fall to the
ground. The fluorine on the particles can poison livestock grazing on ash-coated grass and also contaminate
domestic water supplies.
Cataclysmic eruptions, such as the June 15, 1991, eruption of Mount Pinatubo (Philip- pines), inject huge amounts of
sulfur dioxide gas into the stratosphere, where it combines with water to form an aerosol (mist) of sulfuric acid. By
reflecting solar radiation, such aerosols can lower the Earth’s average surface temperature for extended periods of
time by several degrees Fahrenheit (˚F). These sulfuric acid aerosols also contribute to the destruction of the ozone
layer by altering chlorine and nitrogen compounds in the upper atmosphere.
Lava Flows and Domes
Molten rock (magma) that pours or oozes onto the Earth’s surface is called lava and forms lava flows. The higher a
lava’s content of silica (silicon dioxide, SiO ), the less easily it flows. For example, low-silica basalt lava can form
fast-moving (10 to 30 miles per hour) streams or can spread out in broad thin sheets as much as several miles wide.
Since 1983, Kilauea Volcano on the Island of Hawaii has erupted basalt lava flows that have destroyed nearly 200
houses and severed the nearby coastal highway. In contrast, flows of higher-silica andesite and dacite lava tend to
be thick and sluggish, traveling only short distances from a vent. Dacite and rhyolite lavas often squeeze out of a
vent to form irregular mounds called lava domes. Between 1980 and 1986, a dacite lava dome at Mount St. Helens
grew to about 1,000 feet high and 3,500 feet across.
Lava Fountain
During the 1959 eruption of
Kilauea Iki, fountaining lava and
volcanic debris completely
blocked several of the roads in the
Hawaii Volcanoes National Park.
It created the lava lake seen here
and the cinder cone to the left of
the fountain. (USGS)
Pyroclastic Flows
High-speed avalanches of hot ash, rock fragments, and gas can move down the sides of a volcano during explosive
eruptions or when the steep side of a growing lava dome collapses and breaks apart. These pyroclastic flows
can be as hot as 1,500˚F and move at speeds of 100 to 150 miles per hour. Such flows tend to follow valleys and are
capable of knocking down and burning everything in their paths.
Lower-density pyroclastic flows, called pyroclastic surges, can easily overflow ridges hundreds of feet high. The
climactic eruption of Mount St. Helens on May 18, 1980, generated a series of explosions that formed a huge
pyroclastic surge. This so-called “lateral blast” destroyed an area of 230 square miles. Trees 6 feet in diameter were
mowed down like blades of grass as far as 15 miles from the volcano.
Volcano Landslides
A landslide or debris avalanche is a rapid downhill movement of rocky material, snow, and (or) ice. Volcano
landslides range in size from small movements of loose debris on the surface of a volcano to massive collapses of the
entire summit or sides of a volcano. Steep volcanoes are susceptible to landslides because they are built up partly of
layers of loose volcanic rock fragments. Some rocks on volcanoes have also been altered to soft, slippery clay minerals
by circulating hot, acidic ground water.
Landslides on volcano slopes are triggered when eruptions, heavy rainfall, or large
earthquakes cause these materials to break free and move downhill.
At least five large landslides have swept down the slopes of Mount Rainier, Washington, during the past 6,000 years.
The largest volcano landslide in historical time occurred at the start of the May 18, 1980, Mount St. Helens eruption.
Lahars
Mudflows or debris flows composed mostly of volcanic materials on the flanks of a volcano are called lahars.
These flows of mud, rock, and water can rush down valleys and stream channels at speeds of 20 to 40 miles per
hour or even faster, depending on the slope, and can travel more than 50 miles.
Some lahars contain so much rock debris (60 to 90% by weight) that they look like fast-moving
rivers of wet concrete.
Close to their source, these flows are powerful enough to rip up and carry trees, houses, and huge boulders miles
downstream. Farther downstream they entomb everything in their path in mud.
Historically, lahars have been one of the deadliest volcano hazards.
They can occur both during an eruption and
when a volcano is quiet. The water that creates
lahars can come from melting snow and ice
(especially water from a glacier melted by a
pyroclastic flow or surge), intense rainfall, or the
break-out of a summit crater lake. Large lahars
are a potential hazard to many communities
downstream from glacier-clad volcanoes, such as
Mount Rainier.
You can learn more about lahars at
http://volcanoes.usgs.gov/hazards/lahar/ Search
YouTube.com for “lahar” – there are a lot of
exciting videos!
A rocky, muddy lahar filling a river bed.
Colombia Lahar
This lahar destroyed the city of Armero, Colombia in 1985, killing 20,000 people.
Lahars (continued)
Non-Eruptive Lahar
A tree stump in the Electron mudflow (lahar), which began as an avalanche of hydrothermally altered rock
high on Mount Rainier’s west flank near Sunset Amphitheater, but its onset cannot be correlated with
volcanism. The lahar was highly fluid and flowed 100 km (60 mi) downstream to the Puget Sound
lowland. When it entered the Puget Sound lowland in the community of Electron, it was 30 m (98 ft) deep.
The Electron Mudflow reminds us of the possibility that, occasionally, lahars may have non–eruption
origins and thus may occur with little conventional volcanic warning.
(USGS) (USGS)
(USGS)
Lahars (continued)
Mt. Etna
Mt. Etna (below) towers 10,991 feet (3350 m) above
the city of Catania (population approx. 1 million).
The people of Sicily have been living with this volcano
since the Greeks and Romans settled the island.
Catania itself has been over-run by lava flows
eighteen times. The lava flow at right destroyed much
of Catania and changed its coastline in 1669. This
medieval castle’s thick walls protected it from the 8
meter-thick lava, but it was no longer beach-front
property when the lava moved the shoreline by nearly
a kilometer. (BYUI photos)
Examples of Volcanic Hazards
Vesuvius
On August 24, A.D. 79, Vesuvius Volcano
suddenly exploded and destroyed the Roman cities
of Pompeii and Herculaneum. Although
Vesuvius had shown stirrings of life when a
succession of earthquakes in A.D. 63 caused some
damage, it had been quiet for hundreds of years
and was considered "extinct." Its surface and crater
were green and covered with vegetation, so the
eruption was totally unexpected.
Yet within a few hours, hot volcanic ash and dust
buried the two cities so thoroughly that their ruins
were not uncovered for nearly 1700 years, when the
discovery of an outer wall in 1748 started a period
that developed the science of modern archeology.
Vesuvius has continued its activity intermittently
ever since A.D 79 with numerous minor eruptions
and several major eruptions occurring in 1631,
1794, 1872, 1906, and in 1944 in the midst of the
Italian campaign of World War II.
Videos of 1944 eruption
Mt. Vesuvius and a gate into Pompeii. (BYUI)
See Pompeii in Google Earth
Take a Photo Tour of Pompeii (PDF)
Turn on the “3D buildings” layer to see ruins at Pompeii
Herculaneum
Herculaneum was buried with Pompeii by pyroclastic flows from Mt. Vesuvius in August, 79 A.D. The
ancient Roman port town now lies a mile inland and up to 90 feet underground. The structure at the
bottom of the photo was at the sea shore. The roofs in this photo are modern. (BYUI)
Vesuvius (continued)
See Herculaneum in Google Earth
St. Helens
In the United States on March 27, 1980, Mount St. Helens volcano in the Cascade Range, southwestern
Washington, reawakened after more than a century of dormancy and provided a dramatic and tragic reminder that
there are active volcanoes in the "lower 48" States as well as in Hawaii and Alaska. The catastrophic eruption of
Mount St. Helens on May 18, 1980, and related mudflows and flooding caused significant loss of life (57 dead or
missing) and property damage lover $1.2 billion). Mount St. Helens has remained intermittently active ever since,
including an episode of lava dome building from 2004 - 2008.
Videos of 1980 eruption
Videos of lava dome growth
You can also simply search YouTube.com for “St. Helens eruption” to find these and more videos.
Eruption Basics
Volcanoes are built by the accumulation of their own eruptive
products which include the following:
• Magma is molten rock underground.
• Lava is molten rock that erupts onto the ground surface.
• Bombs are wind-shaped rocks that form when lava is thrown
into the air and is shaped by the wind.
• Tephra includes everything that travels through the air in an
eruption including
• ash (sand-sized particles),
• dust
• bombs rock fragments (cold rocks).
• Vents are volcanic openings through which the molten rock
and associated gases are expelled. The vent connects with
reservoirs of molten rock below the surface of the Earth.
Tephra
Tephra deposited by Mount St. Helens (USGS).
Volcanic Bombs
Volcanic bombs erupted as blobs of lava,
and were ejected at high velocities into the
air, where they were shaped by the wind.
They harden before hitting the ground,
preserving their shapes. Bombs can be as
large as trucks! (USGS)
Cross Section of a Cinder Cone
Representation of the internal structure of a typical cinder cone.
Eruption Basics
Eruption Basics (continued)
Molten rock is lighter than the surrounding solid rock, much like hot air is lighter than cold. Driven by this buoyancy and
gas pressure, magma forces its way upward and may ultimately break though zones of weaknesses in the Earth's crust.
If magma makes it to the surface, an eruption begins, and the molten rock may pour from
the vent as non-explosive lava flows, or it may shoot violently into the air as dense clouds
of lava fragments.
Cinder Cone Eruption
A lava fountain eruption
forming a cinder cone at the
Hawaiian volcano Kilauea.
(USGS)
Larger fragments fall back around the vent, and accumulations of fall-back fragments may form a cinder cone. Some of
the finer tephra may be carried by the wind to fall to the ground many miles away. The finest ash particles may be ejected
miles up into the atmosphere and carried many times around the world by stratospheric winds before settling out.
St. Helens Historic Tephra Deposit
This outcrop is 9 km from St. Helens with and is composed of pre-1980 tephra . Layers have been mapped and
categorized and are listed below.
• Tephra set S overlies glacial gravel and consists of coarse, pale layers (Sg and So) overlying ash-size deposits.
• Set J is made up of one lapilli bed and is separated from set S by a thick, oxidized ash-rich deposit.
• Set Y consists of lapilli-and-bomb layers interbedded with ash.
• Set P is characterized by pale, thin layers including a flowage deposit.
• Set B is relatively dark and consists of thin layers.
• Set W, about 100 cm thick, consists chiefly of lapilli and bombs. (Photograph taken in 1970 USGS).
Eruption Basics (continued)
Eruption Basics (continued)
Originating many tens of miles beneath the ground, the ascending magma commonly contains some crystals, fragments of
surrounding (unmelted) rocks, and dissolved gases, but it is primarily a liquid composed principally of oxygen, silicon,
aluminum, iron, magnesium, calcium, sodium, potassium, titanium, and manganese. Magmas also contain many other
chemical elements in trace quantities.
Upon cooling, the liquid magma may precipitate crystals of various minerals until solidification is complete to form an
igneous rock.
Volcanic Rock
Fine-grained volcanic rock. (USGS)
• Intrusive (or plutonic) rocks form when magma
cools underground, which are characterized by a
coarsely crystalline texture.
• Volcanic rocks are characterized by fine-grained
texture, glassy texture, pyroclastic texture (consisting of
shattered minerals, glass, pumice, and ash), or vesicular
texture (containing bubbles formed by gases).
Tuff is a rock composed of tephra that has been more or
less consolidated. It is made of rock, glass, and mineral
fragments in a volcanic ash matrix. Tuffs commonly are
composed of much shattered volcanic rock glass--chilled
magma blown into the air and then deposited. If volcanic
particles fall to the ground at a very high temperature,
they may fuse together, forming a welded tuff. Tuff is
common around Yellowstone and the Cascades volcanoes.
It’s All About The Gas
All magmas contain dissolved gases, and as they rise to the surface to erupt, the confining pressures are reduced
and the dissolved gases are liberated either quietly or explosively. If the lava is a thin fluid (low viscosity), the
gases may escape easily. But if the lava is thick and pasty (high viscosity), the gases will not move freely, but will
build up tremendous pressure, and ultimately escape by exploding the magma.
Gases in lava may be compared with the gas in a bottle of a carbonated soft drink. If you put your thumb over the
top of the bottle and shake it vigorously, the gas separates from the liquid and forms bubbles. When you remove
your thumb abruptly, there is a miniature explosion of gas and liquid. The gases in lava behave in somewhat the
same way. Their sudden expansion causes the terrible explosions that throw out great masses of solid rock as well
as lava, dust, and ash.
Vesicular volcanic rock from the Moon. (NASA)
Gases drive explosive eruptions – no gas, no
explosion.
Factors that increase the viscosity of the magma can also
contribute to the explosivity of an eruption. Cooler magmas
and those with high silica content (rhyolite in particular,
but also andesite) tend to erupt more explosively. Basalt is
usually low viscosity, so that gases cause fountains, and
large explosive eruptions are more rare.
The separation of gas from lava may produce rock froth
called pumice. Some of this froth is so light because of the
many gas bubbles that it floats on water. In many
eruptions, the froth is shattered explosively into small
fragments that are hurled high into the air in the form of
volcanic cinders (red or black), volcanic ash (commonly tan
or gray), and volcanic dust.
Where does magma come from? The diagram below illustrates that heat concentrated in the Earth's upper mantle raises
temperatures sufficiently to partially melt rock locally by melting the minerals with the lowest melting temperatures,
resulting in small, isolated blobs of magma.
hot spot
Volcanic Rock Types
These blobs then collect, rise through conduits and fractures, and some ultimately may accumulate in larger pockets or
reservoirs (called magma chambers) a few miles beneath the Earth's surface. Mounting pressure within the reservoir
caused by continued in-flow of magma and exolution of gases may drive the magma further upward through weak zones.
If it reaches the surface, it erupts and forms a volcano.
Volcanic Rock Types (continued)
Because the composition of a volcanic rock depends on where it was generated (crust or mantle) and what materials it
passed through, specific types of volcanic rocks are found in each tectonic setting. For example, oceanic crust consists
entirely of basalt produced from partially melted mantle at divergent plate boundaries.
Oceanic hot spots are made of basalt, while continental hot spots include basalt and rhyolite.
Andesite is found primarily at convergent plate boundaries.
It is easy to see how the theory of Plate Tectonics solved a puzzle that igneous petrologists (those who study igneous rocks)
had investigated for decades.
Basalt (CA) Andesite (NASA) Rhyolite (NASA)
In continents, magmas are generated in the crust as well as at varying depths in the upper mantle. A variety of volcanic rock
compositions are created by mixing and chemical changes as magmas rise through the upper mantle and crust. Darkcolored volcanic rocks are called basalt. Those with medium-gray and intermediate colors are called andesite (named
after the Andes Mountains). Light-colored volcanic rocks are called rhyolite.
Rhyolite
• light colors
• high silica content
• often tuff (explosively erupted)
• often contains pumice
Andesite
• intermediate colors
• intermediate silica content
• can erupt explosively
Basalt
• dark gray to black
• low silica content
• rarely explosive
• can be rusty red (caused
by corrosive gases)
Aa
Pahoehoe
Basaltic Lava Flow
(USGS)
Two Polynesian terms are used to identify the surface character of lava flows.
1) Aa, (pronounced “ah-ah”) a basalt with a rough, blocky appearance, much like furnace slag.
2) Pahoehoe, (pronounced “pahoi-hoi”) a more fluid variety with a smooth, satiny and often ropey appearance, is
shown in the photos to the right. (USGS)
Basalt (continued)
Aa Lava Flow
(USGS)
Pahoehoe Lava Flow
(USGS)
Aa flow on top of pahoehoe, Kilauea. (USGS)
Basalt (continued)
Obsidian is a glassy volcanic rock. It is significant
because it erupts at temperatures so high and it
cools so quickly that no minerals form. (NPS)
Volcanic tuff containing black rock fragments. (USGS)
Tuff layers in Yellowstone Canyon. (USGS)
Granite
Because it is an intrusive rock, granite has a
coarsely crystalline texture. (NASA)
Rock Type Comparison
Cooling Joints
As lava cools and hardens, it contracts.
To accommodate the decreased volume,
fractures open, breaking the lava into 6-sided
columns. The fractures are called cooling
joints. (USGS photos)
Principal Types of Volcanoes
Geologists generally group volcanoes into four main kinds--cinder cones, composite volcanoes, shield volcanoes, and lava
domes.
Cinder Cones
Schematic representation of the internal structure of a typical
cinder cone (USGS)
Cinder cones are the simplest type of
volcano. They are built from particles and
blobs of congealed lava ejected from a
single vent. As the gas-charged lava is
blown violently into the air, it breaks into
small fragments that solidify and fall as
cinders (rocky tephra) around the vent to
form a circular or oval cone.
Most cinder cones have a bowl-shaped
crater at the summit and rarely rise more
than a thousand feet or so above their
surroundings. Cinder cones are numerous
in western North America as well as
throughout other volcanic terrains of the
world.
Mauna Kea (Hawaii)
Cinder cones dot the flanks of Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The gravel road winds between them. Mauna Kea is presently a dormant
volcano, having last erupted about 4,500 years ago. However, Mauna Kea is likely to erupt again. Its quiescent periods
between eruptions are long compared to those of the active volcanoes Hualalai (which erupts every few hundred years),
Mauna Loa (which erupts every few years to few tens of years) and Kilauea (which erupts every few years).
Cinder Cones (continued)
Cinder Cones (continued)
In 1943 a cinder cone started growing on a farm near the village of Parícutin in Mexico. Explosive eruptions caused
by gas rapidly expanding and escaping from molten lava formed cinders that fell back around the vent, building up
the cone to a height of 1200 feet. The last explosive eruption left a funnel-shaped crater at the top of the cone. After
the excess gases had largely dissipated, the molten rock quietly poured out on the surrounding surface of the cone and
moved downslope as lava flows.
See Paricutin, Mexico in Google Maps
Parícutin Volcano, Mexico, is a cinder
cone rising approximately 1,200 feet
above the surrounding plain. (USGS)
This order of events--eruption, formation of cone and crater,
lava flow--is a common sequence in the formation of cinder
cones.
During 9 years of activity, Parícutin built a prominent cone,
covered about 100 square miles with ash, and destroyed the
town of San Juan. Geologists from many parts of the world
studied Parícutin during its lifetime and learned a great deal
about volcanism, its products, and the modification of a
volcanic landform by erosion.
Composite Volcanoes
Some of the Earth's grandest mountains are composite volcanoes--sometimes called stratovolcanoes (which
means “layered”). They are typically steep-sided, symmetrical cones of large dimension built of alternating layers of
lava flows, volcanic ash, cinders, blocks, and bombs.
They are often a composite of rock types (rhyolite, andesite, basalt), hence the name “composite.”
Schematic representation of the internal
structure of a typical composite volcano.
Tour Composite Volcanoes in Google Earth
They may rise thousands of feet above their bases. Some
of the most conspicuous and beautiful mountains in the
world are composite volcanoes, including Mount Fuji in
Japan; Mount Cotopaxi in Ecuador; Mount Shasta in
California; Mount Hood in Oregon; and Mount St.
Helens and Mount Rainier in Washington.
Most composite volcanoes have a crater at the summit
that contains a central vent or a clustered group of vents,
and often lava domes. Lavas either flow through breaks
in the crater wall or issue from fissures on the flanks of
the cone. Lava, solidified within the fissures, forms dikes
that act as ribs which greatly strengthen the cone.
The essential feature of a composite volcano is a conduit
system through which magma from a reservoir deep in
the Earth's crust rises to the surface. The volcano is built
up by the accumulation of material erupted through the
conduit and increases in size as lava, cinders, ash, etc.,
are added to its slopes.
Composite Volcanoes (continued)
When a composite volcano becomes dormant, erosion begins to destroy the cone. As the cone is stripped away, the
hardened magma filling the conduit (the volcanic plug) and fissures (the dikes) becomes exposed, and it too is
slowly reduced by erosion. Finally, all that remains is the plug and dike complex projecting above the land surface--a
telltale remnant of the vanished volcano.
An interesting variation of a composite volcano can be seen at Crater Lake in Oregon. From what geologists can
interpret of its past, a high volcano--called Mount Mazama- probably similar in appearance to present-day Mount
Rainier was once located at this spot. Following a series of tremendous explosions about 6,800 years ago, the volcano
lost its top.
Crater Lake, Oregon
 Wizard Island, a cinder cone, rises above the lake surface. (BYUI)
Enormous volumes of volcanic ash and
dust were expelled and swept down the
slopes as ash flows and avalanches. These
large-volume explosions rapidly drained
the lava beneath the mountain and
weakened the upper part. The top then
collapsed to form a large depression,
which later filled with water and is now
completely occupied by beautiful Crater
Lake.
A last gasp of eruptions produced a small
cinder cone, which rises above the water
surface as Wizard Island near the rim of
the lake.
Composite Volcanoes (continued)
Depressions such as Crater Lake, formed by collapse of volcanoes, are known as calderas. They are usually large,
steep-walled, basin-shaped depressions formed by the collapse of a large area over and around a volcanic vent or
vents. Calderas range in form and size from roughly circular depressions 1 to 15 miles in diameter to huge elongated
depressions as much as 60 miles long.
Shishaldin Volcano
Shishaldin Volcano, an imposing composite cone, towers 9,372
feet above sea level in the Aleutian Islands, Alaska. (USGS)
Composite volcanoes on the Kamchatka Penninsula, eastern Russia include majestic
Kliuchevskoy (center), which is frequently active. At 4835 m (15859 ft.), it is the tallest active
volcano in Eurasia. The white striping is an artifact of the rows of aerial photos.
Composite Volcanoes (continued)
Shield volcanoes, the third type of volcano, are built almost entirely of fluid lava flows.
Flow after flow pours out in all directions from a central summit vent, or group of vents, building a
broad, gently sloping cone of flat, domical shape, with a profile much like that of a warrior's shield.
The internal structure of a typical shield volcano (USGS).
Shield Volcanoes
They are built up slowly by the accretion of thousands of highly fluid lava flows called basalt lava that spread
widely over great distances, and then cool as thin, gently dipping sheets. Lavas also commonly erupt from vents
along fractures (rift zones) that develop on the flanks of the cone. Some of the largest volcanoes in the world are
shield volcanoes.
Shield Volcanoes (continued)
In northern California and Oregon, many shield volcanoes have diameters of 3 or 4 miles and heights of 1,500 to
2,000 feet. The Hawaiian Islands are composed of linear chains of these volcanoes including Kilauea and Mauna Loa
on the island of Hawaii-- two of the world's most active volcanoes. The floor of the ocean is more than 15,000 feet
deep at the bases of the islands. As Mauna Loa, the largest of the shield volcanoes (and also the world's largest active
volcano), projects 13,677 feet above sea level, its top is over 28,000 feet above the deep ocean floor.
In some eruptions, basaltic lava pours out quietly
from long fissures instead of central vents and
floods the surrounding countryside with lava flow
upon lava flow, forming broad plateaus.
Lava plateaus of this type can be seen in:

• Iceland
• Washington (southeastern)
• Oregon (eastern)
• Idaho (southern)
Along the Snake River in Idaho, and the
Columbia River in Washington and Oregon, these
lava flows are beautifully exposed and measure
more than a mile in total thickness.
Mauna Loa Volcano, Hawaii
A giant among the active volcanoes of the world; snowcapped Mauna Kea Volcano in the distance (USGS).
The island of Hawaii is a cluster of 5 shield volcanoes. Mauna Loa and Kilauea have been active most
recently; in fact, Kilaeua has been erupting continuously since 1983. Lava flows in tubes from the
Kilauea summit downhill to the Pu’u O’o cinder cone, where lava flows have been common. Mauna
Kea tops out at 13,796 ft. (4205 m); Mauna Loa at 13,678 ft. (4169 m); Kilauea at 4091 ft. (1247 m).
Kilauea
Mauna Loa
Mauna Kea
Pu’u O’o
Kona
Shield Volcanoes (continued)
Lava Domes
Volcanic or lava domes are formed by relatively small, bulbous masses of lava too viscous to flow any distance;
consequently, on extrusion, the lava piles over and around its vent. A dome grows largely by expansion from within.
All volcanic rocks contract when the cool; consequently, volcanic rocks are highly fractured. As a lava dome grows,
its outer surface cools, hardens, and fractures, spilling loose fragments down its sides. Some domes form craggy
knobs or spines over the volcanic vent, while others form short, steep-sided flows.
Schematic representation of the internal structure of a typical
volcanic dome (USGS).
Volcanic domes commonly occur within the craters or on the flanks of large composite volcanoes. The nearly
circular Novarupta Dome that formed during the 1912 eruption of Katmai Volcano, Alaska, measures 800 feet across
and 200 feet high. The internal structure of this dome--defined by layering of lava fanning upward and outward
from the center--indicates that it grew largely by expansion from within.
Mont Pelée in Martinique, Lesser Antilles, and Lassen Peak and Mono domes in California are examples of lava
domes. An extremely destructive eruption accompanied the growth of a dome at Mont Pelée in 1902. The coastal
town of St. Pierre, about 4 miles downslope to the south, was demolished and nearly 30,000 inhabitants were killed
by an incandescent, high-velocity avalanche (pyroclastic flow) and associated hot gases.
Only two men survived -- one because he was in a poorly ventilated, dungeon-like jail cell, and the other who
somehow made his way safely through the burning city.
The Novarupta Dome formed during the 1912 eruption of Katma Volcano, Alaska (USGS).
Lava Domes (continued)
Lava domes partially filled the crater of Mount St. Helens between 2004 and 2008.
Lava Domes (continued)
These USGS photos show growth of the lava domes in the crater of Mount St. Helens, Washington in 2005. Highviscosity lava is extruded from a fracture, much like a child’s clay through a mold, giving the infant lava dome smooth
sides. As the lava cools, it contracts, fractures, and breaks into rubble. The smooth-sided “whalebacks” seen in these
photos are today just piles of rocks like the 1980-1986 lava domes. (USGS photos)
See St. Helens in Google Earth
Lava Domes (continued)
Other Volcanic Structures
Plugs (necks)
Solidified magma, along with fragmental volcanic and wall-rock materials, can be preserved in the feeding
conduits of a volcano upon cessation of activity. These preserved rocks form roughly cylindrical masses, from
which project radiating dikes; they may be visualized as the fossil remains of the innards of a volcano (the socalled "volcanic plumbing system") and are referred to as volcanic plugs or necks.
The igneous material in a plug may have a range of composition similar to that of associated lavas or ash, but
may also include fragments and blocks of denser, coarser grained rocks-- higher in iron and magnesium, lower
in silicon--thought to be samples of the Earth's deep crust or upper mantle plucked and transported by the
ascending magma. Many plugs and necks are largely or wholly composed of fragmental volcanic material and
of fragments of wall-rock, which can be of any type.
Ship Rock, San Juan County, New Mexico (USGS)
Typically, volcanic plugs and necks tend to be more
resistant to erosion than their enclosing rock
formations. After the volcano becomes inactive and
erosion removes the softer materials, the exhumed
plug may stand up in bold relief as an irregular,
columnar structure.
One of the best known and most spectacular of these
in the United States is Ship Rock in New Mexico,
which towers some 1,700 feet above the more deeply
eroded surrounding plains. Devil’s Tower, Wyoming,
is another volcanic neck. Volcanic necks are found
elsewhere in the western United States and also in
Germany, France, South Africa, Tanzania, and
Siberia. (See the following photos).
Devil’s Tower
Devil’s Tower, Wyoming, is a prominent volcanic
neck (or plug). The original cinder cone’s softer
materials have all washed away, leaving only the
neck. (NASA and NPS)
Plugs (necks)
The monastery and statue at Le Puy-En-Velay, France, are built atop volcanic necks (or plugs) (from the town’s website).
Plugs (necks)
Maars
Also called "tuff cones," maars are shallow, flat-floored craters that formed as a result of a violent expansion of
magmatic gas or steam. When lava or magma touch water, a violent phreatic explosion occurs when the water
flashes into steam. Maars range in size from 200 to 6,500 feet across and from 30 to 650 feet deep, and most are
commonly filled with water to form natural lakes. Most maars have low rims composed of a mixture of loose
fragments of volcanic rock and rocks torn from the walls of the magma conduits.
Zuni Salt Lake Maar, Catron County, New Mexico.
(USGS)
Maars occur in the western United States, in the
Eifel region of Germany, and in other
geologically young volcanic regions of the world.
An excellent example of a maar is Zuni Salt Lake
in New Mexico, a shallow saline lake that
occupies a flat-floored crater about 6,500 feet
across and 400 feet deep. Its low rim is
composed of loose pieces of basaltic lava and
wall-rocks (sandstone, shale, limestone) of the
underlying plug, as well as random chunks of
ancient crystalline rocks blasted upward from
great depths.
The Menan Buttes, Idaho, are phreatic tuff cones. As the name implies, they erupted explosively when rising magma
encountered groundwater and the Snake River (see diagram). This powerful explosion broke the lava into small
pieces (tuff) and threw river gravel into the air with the tephra. As a result, this volcano also contains pieces of gravel!
(BLM diagram)
crater
Rexburg
See Menan Buttes in Google Earth
Be sure to rotate and move the view to see the volcano’s shape.
Maars
Non-volcanic Craters
Not every crater is volcanic! Some well-exposed, nearly circular areas of intensely deformed sedimentary rocks, in
which a central vent-like feature is surrounded by a ring-shaped depression, resemble volcanic structures in general
form.
Impact craters are formed by collisions with the Earth of large meteorites, asteroids, or comets.
Fragments of meteorites or chemically detectable traces of extraterrestrial materials and indications of strong forces
acting from above, rather than from below, distinguish impact from volcanic features. An impressive example of an
impact structure is Meteor Crater, Ariz., which is visited by thousands of tourists each year. This impact crater, 4,000
feet in diameter and 600 feet deep, was formed in the geologic past (probably 30,00050,000 years before present) by
a meteorite striking the Earth at a speed of many thousands of miles per hour.
Meteor Crater,
Arizona.
In addition to Meteor Crater, very fresh, morphologically distinct impact craters are found at three sites near Odessa,
Tex., as well as 10 or 12 other locations in the world. Older, less distinct impact structures include about ten wellestablished sites in the United States and perhaps 80 or 90 elsewhere in the world.
Other types of nonvolcanic craters can be formed by subsurface salt-dome intrusion and collapse, karst (dissolution
of limestone by groundwater), and collapse related to melting of glacial ice. 
Types of Volcanic Eruptions
A Strombolian eruption at Tungurahua, Ecuador in
1999 (USGS)
During an episode of activity, a volcano commonly displays a distinctive pattern of behavior. Some mild eruptions merely
discharge steam and other gases, whereas other eruptions quietly extrude quantities of lava. The most spectacular
eruptions consist of violent explosions that blast great clouds of gas-laden debris (pulverized rock) into the atmosphere.
The type of volcanic eruption Is often labeled with the name
of a well-known volcano where characteristic behavior is
similar--hence the use of such terms as "Strombolian,"
"Vulcanian," “Plinian,“ "Hawaiian," and others. Some
volcanoes may exhibit only one characteristic type of eruption
during an interval of activity--others may display an entire
spectrum of types.
Strombolian Eruptions
In a Strombolian-type eruption, huge clots of
molten lava burst from the summit crater to form
luminous arcs through the sky. Collecting on the flanks
of the cone, lava clots combined to stream down the
slopes in fiery rivulets. Strombolian eruptions affect
only the volcano’s slopes.
In contrast, the eruptive activity of Parícutin Volcano in 1947 demonstrated a Vulcanian-type eruption, in which a
dense cloud of ash-laden gas explodes from the crater and rises thousands of feet above the peak. Vulcanian
eruptions affect the local region because ash is carried high into the atmosphere. In the photo at right, steaming ash
forms a whitish cloud near the upper level of the cone.
A Vulcanian eruption at Parícutin Volcano, Mexico, 1947. (USGS)
Vulcanian Eruptions
Plinian Eruptions
In a Plinian eruption, great quantities of ash-laden gas are violently erupted to form mushroom-shaped cloud high
in the atmosphere. They are typified by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in Italy in A.D. 79 that buried Pompeii.
Plinian eruptions are the most powerfully explosive of all eruptions. Dust and ash can reach the upper troposphere
and lower stratosphere, where winds can carry them around the world.
These eruptions are named after Pliny the Elder, an ancient Roman military commander and naturalist who
described the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 A.D. as reaching high into the sky and shaped like a stone pine (which has
spreading branches near its top. See the accompanying photo). Modern examples of Plinian eruptions include
Mount St. Helens in 1980 and Mt. Pinatubo, Philippines, in 1991.
A stone pine at Pompeii, Italy, with Mt. Vesuvius in the
background. (BYUI)
Plinian Eruption-- Mt. Spurr, Alaska in 1992.
Plinian Eruptions
Mt. St. Helens
Mount St. Helens in Washington state experienced a
Plinian eruption on May 18, 1980. The blast traveled up
to 670 miles per hour, and leveled the forest for up to 19
miles from the volcano (below). (NPS)
St. Helens Eruption
In this view toward the north, you can see
the lateral blast (pyroclastic flow) heading
northward, thankfully away from the
photographer’s airplane. The blast was
triggered when the northern 1/3 of the
mountain collapsed in the largest landslide
ever filmed.
Plinian Eruptions (continued)
Pyroclastic Flows
A pyroclastic flow or nuée ardente (glowing cloud) can occur in two different ways:
1) When an explosive eruption sends a massive quantity of gas, dust, ash, and lava fragments high into the air,
and those materials fall back onto the slopes of the volcano.
2) When a lava dome at the summit of a volcano collapses, sending hot avalanches down the slopes.
They form tongue-like, glowing avalanches that move downslope at velocities that can exceed 120
miles per hour.
Plinian eruption -- Chaiten, Chile in 2008 (above) (USGS).
As the dense materials move down-slope,
they compress the air in front of them
and glide on a friction-free cushion,
causing them to accelerate to surprising
speeds.
Pyroclastic flows contain not only rocks
and dust at high temperatures, but toxic
gases that can extend beyond the ends of
the avalanche. Such eruptive activity can
cause great destruction and loss of life if
it occurs in populated areas, as
demonstrated by the devastation of St.
Pierre during the 1902 eruption of Mont
Pelée on Martinique in the Caribbean.
Pyroclastic flows cascaded down canyons on
the Mayon volcano in the Philippines in 1984.
Notice the fertile volcanic soils that have
drawn people to live near the volcano. (USGS)
When the lava dome at the summit of
Colima volcano in western Mexico grew
too large to be stable, it avalanched down
the slopes. The dust cloud here is rising
from the avalanche on the ground. The
photo was taken in 1998. (USGS)
Pyroclastic Flow
Hawaiian Eruptions
"Hawaiian" eruptions may begin along fissures or fractures that serve as linear vents. In fissure-type eruptions
molten, incandescent lava spurts from a fissure and feeds lava streams that flow downslope. In central-vent
eruptions, a fountain of fiery lava can spurt to a height of several hundred feet or more to form a cone. Lava flows
downhill like water, a major difference being that lava hardens as it cools, filling up the low places. Lava may collect
in old craters to form lava lakes, or feed radiating flows.
Lava Fountains and Flows
Fountains (background) and lava flows (streams)
on Mauna Loa, Hawaii in 1984. (USGS)
Fissure Eruption
Fissure eruption on Mauna Loa in 1984. Because
magma moves upward through the crust through
fractures, it naturally erupts from fractures when
it first reaches the surface (USGS).
Geysers, Fumaroles, and Hot Springs
Geysers, fumaroles (also called solfataras), and hot springs are generally found in regions of young volcanic
activity. Surface water percolates downward through the rocks below the Earth's surface to high-temperature regions
surrounding a magma reservoir, either active or recently solidified but still hot. There the water is heated, becomes
less dense, and rises back to the surface along fissures and cracks.
Fumaroles are one of the most significant volcanic hazards, hurting or killing hundreds each year.
Old Faithful Geyser, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming. (USGS)
Erupting geysers provide spectacular
displays of underground energy
suddenly unleashed, but their
mechanisms are not completely
understood. Large amounts of hot
water are presumed to fill underground
cavities.
The water, upon further heating, is
violently ejected when a portion of it
suddenly flashes into steam. This cycle
can be repeated with remarkable
regularity, as for example, at Old
Faithful Geyser in Yellowstone
National Park, which erupts on an
average of about once every 90
minutes.
Fumaroles, which emit mixtures of steam and other gases, are fed by
conduits that pass through the water table before reaching the surface of
the ground. Hydrogen sulfide (H2S), one of the typical gases issuing from
fumaroles, readily oxidizes to sulfuric acid and native sulfur. This accounts
for the intense chemical activity and brightly colored rocks in many
thermal areas.
Hot springs occur in many thermal areas where the surface of the Earth
intersects the water table. The temperature and rate of discharge of hot
springs depend on factors such as the rate at which water circulates through
the system of underground pathways, the amount of heat supplied at depth,
and the extent of dilution of the heated water by cool ground water near the
surface.
Fumaroles
Black Growler steam vents
(fumaroles), Norris Basin,
Yellowstone National Park,
Wyoming.
Hot Springs
Mammoth Hot Springs, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming.
Geysers, Fumaroles, and Hot Springs (continued)
Plate Tectonics and Volcanoes
Plate Tectonics explains the locations and types of the world’s volcanoes. They occur primarily at plate boundaries and
hot spots. Plate Tectonics even explains the types of volcanic rocks and why they occur in specific locations.
Rhyolite occurs primarily on continental crust, where there is a large supply of silica. Andesite is found primarily at
convergent plate boundaries. Basalt forms at divergent plate boundaries and hot spots, and is the most abundant
rock type on earth’s surface because it forms the entire bedrock of the ocean floors.
Many volcanoes are in and around the Mediterranean Sea. Mount Etna in Sicily is the largest and highest of these
mountains. Italy's Vesuvius is the only active volcano on the European mainland. Near the island of Vulcano, the
volcano Stromboli has been in a state of nearly continuous, mild eruption since early Roman times. At night, sailors in
the Mediterranean can see the glow from the fiery molten material that is hurled into the air. Very appropriately,
Stromboli has been called "the lighthouse of the Mediterranean.
Plate Tectonics and Volcanoes (continued)
There are more than 500 active volcanoes (those that have erupted at least once within recorded history) in the world,
50 of which are in the United States (Hawaii, Alaska, Washington, Oregon, and California)--although many more are
hidden under the seas. Most active volcanoes are strung like beads along, or near, the margins of the continents, and
more than half encircle the Pacific Ocean as a "Ring of Fire.“ The Ring is, of course, the convergent plate boundaries
that rim the Pacific.
Map showing the distribution of some of the Earth's 500 active volcanoes. (USGS)
To find a volcano in Google Earth or Google Maps, try entering its name (or the name of a nearby city) in the search box.
Volcano Monitoring and Research
Perhaps "modern" volcanology began in 1912, when Thomas A. Jaggar, Head of the Geology Department of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, founded the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO), located on the rim of Kilauea's
caldera. It has been run by the U.S. Geological Survey since 1948.
The USGS now also operates volcano observatories at the Cascades (CVO), Alaska (AVO), and Yellowstone (YVO, in
partnership with University of Utah), where volcanologists, geologists, geochemists, and seismologists study and monitor the
volcanoes. Any warnings about activity would come through these organizations. You can find other global volcano
observatories at this link: http://www.wovo.org/observatories/
BYU-Idaho faculty and students at the U.S. Geological
Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory on the caldera
rim of Kilauea Volcano. (BYUI)
Steam and gas cloud rising from the summit caldera of
Kilauea Volcano. (BYUI)
You should take a few minutes to look at the HVO’s Kilauea pages, where you can look at webcams, photos,
videos, and more of the ongoing Kilauea eruption.
HVO website CVO website YVO website AVO website
For current global volcanic activity, see http://www.volcanodiscovery.com/volcano_news.html
Volcano Monitoring and Research (continued)
In the past few decades, scientists have learned that eruptions are preceded by a definite set of
events. Eruptions don’t sneak up on them any more.
These lessons were successful at Mount St. Helens in 1980 and Mt. Pinatubo, Philippines, in 1991.
Signs of an Impending Eruption
Ground swelling or tilt
Volcanoes gradually swell or "inflate" in building up to an eruption because of the influx of magma into the volcano's
reservoir or "plumbing system"; with the onset of eruption, pressure is immediately relieved and the volcano rapidly
shrinks or "deflates." A wide variety of instruments, including precise spirit-levels, electronic tiltmeters, highprecision GPS, and electronic-laser beam instruments, can measure changes in the slope or "tilt" of the volcano or in
vertical and horizontal distances with a precision of only a few parts in a million.
Swarms of quakes and magmatic tremors
Scientists make a precise determination of the location and magnitude of earthquakes via a well-designed seismic
network. As the volcano inflates by the rise of magma, the enclosing rocks are deformed to the breaking point to
accommodate magma movement. When the rock ultimately fails to permit continued magma ascent, earthquakes
result. Magmatic (or volcanic) tremor is harmonic vibrations that echo inside magma. They are distinct from rockbreaking or tectonic earthquakes by their lack of distinct p- and s-wave arrivals and their distinct long, tapered shape.
By carefully mapping out the variations with time in the locations and depths of earthquake foci, scientists in effect
can track the subsurface movement of magma, horizontally and vertically.
Increased gas emissions
Gases are the lightest component of magma, and so they commonly are the first to rise through fractures to the
ground surface. Gas emissions increase as magma gets closer to the surface. Local changes in the magnetic field have
also been noted preceding and accompanying some eruptions, and such changes are believed to reflect temperature
effects and/or the content of magnetic minerals in the magma.
High pressure in a magma chamber can fracture
the surrounding rock, causing small “rockbreaking” quakes. (USGS)
Example of a magmatic tremor on a
seismogram (USGS)

St. Pierre
The port city of St. Pierre
on the island of Martinique;
Mont Pelée is in the
background.
In 1902, this city was
entirely destroyed by
pyroclastic flows. About
30,000 people died.
